--- 
layout: post
title: Proxy to Lighttpd for Rails apps
---
Over the last few weeks I have been looking at what is required 
to deploy rails applications in an environment with a peak load 
of about 30 requests a second but with an average rate of 1 request 
per second. 

I am running Apache and initially I was hesitant to try "fastscgi":http://www.fastcgi.com/ due to the horror stories that 
I read about on the rails mailing list. I initially tried 
"mod_ruby":http://www.modruby.net/en/ but it was not speedy and it 
consumed large chunks of memory. I assume this was due to to the ruby
interpreter being added to each process. 

Next I migrated to fastcgi which was not anywhere near as painful 
as I had heard. I followed the directions in "Apache tuning for Rails 
and FastCGI":http://scottstuff.net/blog/articles/2005/07/20/apache-tuning-for-rails-and-fastcgi
and I had it up and running in no time. Very occasionally I am seeing 
fastcgi processes that are left alive after a web server reload. Apparently "Lighttpd":http://www.lighttpd.net/ does not have this problem but I need
to stick with Apache2 because of applications running on the server.

I want to try an approach that I read about on the rails mailing list that involves proxying requests to Lighttpd from Apache2 using configuration like the following. This would then allow me to run a separate Lighttpd on to handle the rail requests.

<pre>
<code>
<VirtualHost *:80>
    ServerName napts.realityforge.org
    ProxyPass / http://napts.realityforge.org:8080/
    ProxyPassReverse / http://napts.realityforge.org:8080/
</VirtualHost>
</code>
</pre>

I also noticed an easy way to host multiple rails applications on one hostname. Previously I had created a new hostname for each rails application ala napts.realityforge.org, iplan.realityforge.org, etc. 

<pre>
<code>
<VirtualHost *:80>
    ServerName realityforge.org
    ProxyPass /napts/ http://realityforge.org:8080/
    ProxyPassReverse /napts/ http://realityforge.org:8080/
</VirtualHost>
</code>
</pre>

And then in my rails application I need to add the following to my environment.rb

{% highlight ruby %}
ActionController::AbstractRequest.relative_url_root = "/napts"
{% endhighlight %}

Pretty neat! and it clears up many of my remaining issues with rails.
