---
layout: post
title: Names
---
I seem to have trouble starting projects without a name that I can use. Crazy as it seems I have waited around on starting on various software projects until a name came along that I liked. So this page is just a list of various names that are “coolish” sounding. It is unlikely that I will use any of them but hopefully they will inspire me enough to pick another name and just get started.

### General Names

-   Bigimize: My housemate used this term to describe the maximize button.
-   Codeworm: Comes from Ear-Worm which is apparently a direct translation from german for a song that gets stuck in your head. A code-worm is a bit of code that you just can get rid of.

### Babble Names

Babble was the name of the programming language I started to develop as an experiment.

-   Pod
-   Beam
-   Jam
-   Snuggle
-   Gabba
-   Snort

#### Dark Themed Names

Was thinking about using it for the issue tracker that shone light on darkness of software ;)

-   Shade
-   Dusk
-   Spook
-   Spark

#### Space Themed Names

-   Space

### Character Names

It is always good to have interesting character names when writing a short story and heres my list;

-   Deegan
-   Drake
-   Spark/Sparqs

#### Role names

-   Seekers
-   Marines
-   Dezign

### Other names

-   ***Kryal***: "The Kryal is the portion of the stream (usually upper part) that is fed by melt waters from a glacier, permafrost or permanent ice fields.
-   ***Spindrift***: Spindrift typically refers to spray, particularly to the water spray blown from cresting waves during a gale. May also refer to fine snow blown off the mountain as part of a spindrift avalanche.
-   ***Babble***: to talk enthusiastically or excessively, to utter meaningless or unintelligible sounds.
-   ***Spice***: “Spice is life, the spice must flow” (Source Dune). “If the appearance of spices were to reflect their importance in the history of the world, the bottles of spices would be filled with bright glittery substances; diamonds, rubies, emeralds or gold would be appropriate”

