--- 
layout: post
title: Reading
---
h3. Reading

This page tracks books I have read recently, am reading or plan to read in the near future. I don't read anywhere near as much as I used to. As soon as I started life as a PhD student reading became a part of my "work" life (reading several papers a day will do that).

h4. Current Reading

* "__Programming Ruby, 2nd Ed (The Pick Axe Book)__":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0974514055/qid=1131961552/sr=2-1/ref=pd_bbs_b_2_1/102-8505044-8566514?v=glance&s=books

h4. Recent Reading

* "__Flatland__":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691025258/002-7544571-4871243?v=glance&n=283155&v=glance
* "__Agile Web Development with Rails__":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/097669400X/qid=1131961552/sr=2-2/ref=pd_bbs_b_2_2/102-8505044-8566514?v=glance&s=books
* "__Nightwork: A history of hacks and pranks at MIT__":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0262661373/qid=1131961682/sr=1-1/ref=sr_1_1/102-8505044-8566514?v=glance&s=books
* "__Networked Virtual Environments__":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0201325578/qid=1131967013/sr=1-1/ref=sr_1_1/102-8505044-8566514?v=glance&s=books
* __Thousand Paths to Zen__ by Robert Allen.
* __Clausal Form Logic__ by Tom Richards. (*THE* reference for CFN but sadly out of print)
* "__Snow Crash__":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0553380958/qid=1131967063/sr=2-1/ref=pd_bbs_b_2_1/102-8505044-8566514?v=glance&s=books

h4. Future Reading

* "__Idea Virus__":http://www.sethgodin.com/ideavirus/01-getit.html
* "__The Innovator's Dilemma__":http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0060521996/qid=1131961486/sr=8-1/ref=pd_bbs_1/102-8505044-8566514?v=glance&s=books&n=507846
* "__The Cluetrain Manifesto__":http://cluetrain.com/book/index.html
* "__Programming for the Java Virtual Machine__":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0201309726/002-4054457-4057630?v=glance&n=283155&v=glance
* "__Programming Language Processors in Java: Compilers and Interpreters__":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0130257869/002-4054457-4057630?v=glance&n=283155&%5Fencoding=UTF8&v=glance
* "__Defensive Design for the Web : How to improve error messages, help, forms, and other crisis points (Voices That Matter)__":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/073571410X/ref=dp_return_1/002-4054457-4057630?%5Fencoding=UTF8&n=283155&s=books
* "__Pragmatic Version Control Using Subversion__":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0974514063/ref=dp_return_1/002-7544571-4871243?%5Fencoding=UTF8&n=283155&s=books
* "__Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software__":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321125215/qid=1133413478/sr=2-1/ref=pd_bbs_b_2_1/002-7544571-4871243?s=books%26v=glance%26n=283155
